# Week 5 Exercise  
*Open Source Chip Design Course*  
*July 2024*

---

## Introduction
This week will focus on understanding the tools. No new tools will be installed; instead, the exercises will be more expansive. You will first explore a small layout where you are expected to dive into the generated layout. Then, you will be expected to write some Chisel3 code and run it through the workflow. Finally, you are expected to write the same in Verilog and create a test bench, also in Verilog. 

## Hand-in Assignment
This shall be handed in before next week. You should submit a document (preferably LaTeX) that answers the following questions.

### 1. Exploring the layout
In this assignment, you will be exploring the layout generated by OpenLane2. You are required to visit and read the following page: [OpenLane2 Configuration Reference](https://openlane2.readthedocs.io/en/latest/reference/configuration.html).

1. Open the KLayout viewer using make.  
   You are now expected to show the power strips; you may disable or enable viewable layers in the "Layers." You can use "Hide all" and then the metal layer in which the power strips reside. They are called "met*.drawing." (There should be only 2 power strips.)  
   Display the power strips in your assignment.
2. Describe what a power strip is.
3. Locate the signal pins; these also reside on a metal layer. You shall outline the pins in a program like *Paint* or *GIMP*.
4. How big are the pins?    
5. Now locate and outline the power pins. If they are not there, you might want to read the docs.
6. Change the die area to "" and core area. 
7. Describe what die area is.
8. Describe what core area is.

### 2. Coding Chisel

### 3. Coding Verilog

### 4. Notes
To remember important steps in the future, it will be a good idea for you to take notes. These will not be evaluated, but you are allowed to submit them together with the rest of your assignment. These notes are only for you and are not required.

## Appendix
